---
published: false
layout: post
name: First they came for the... - why teachers need due process
title: First they came for the... - why teachers need due process
tags: 
---

> <p>First they came for the communists,</p>
> and I didn't speak out because I wasn't a communist....

Last week, teachers went back to work. It already promised to be a
rough start to the semester with the new [evaluation
system](http://cestlaz.github.io/2013/09/06/why_i_might_no_longer_be_an_effective_teacher.html#.UizL5N9tw7w). Imagine
our surprise when we found that our long time A.P. Organization
(recently re-titled as A.P. Guidance) had been removed from the
building a moved to the rubber room.

This was a real shock.

Read on and you'll see what there's something horribly amiss here.

First, the back story.

As many of you know, two years ago, Stuyvesant was all over the papers
for what was described as a "cheating scandal." The principal retired
- many of us felt he was forced into retirement, the DOE monitored the
school, and life went on. The DOE also put together a report on their
findings as they investigated the whole incident.

The report was completed last November but was released on August
30th, the Friday right before teachers went back to work. You can find
the full report
[here](http://www.scribd.com/doc/164289314/Stuyvesant-Report-08-30-13-Final).

Randi Damesek had been the A.P. Organization (APO) at Stuy for around
10 years. Over that time, the two of us have had an up and down
relationship. We've clashed at times and been advocates for each other
at others. Regardless, Ms. Damesek was always competent, complete, and
professional. In an administration that could generously be called
dysfunctional Ms. Damesek was the one person you could count on to do
things the right way.

Knowing the school and having read the report, for the life of me, I
can't see what Ms. Damesek could have done differently. 

Her responsibility during exams is to organize the proctoring schedule
and make sure a proctor is in the room. She did so. The fact that the
schedule was changed is immaterial as this is common in a large school
- teachers call in sick, emergencies come up etc. As to the
supervision of the exam, that falls to the departmental assistant
principals. They are the ones that write out the instructions and they
are the ones that proctors are told to contact if there are any
problems or questions. That idea Ms. Damesek be held responsible for
the supervisory APs obligations is weak at best.

Likewise, Ms. Damesek took direction from Principal Teitel. If she
didn't, she could have been held up on insubordination charges. She was
in a lose lose situation.

I'm sure if you read the report and know anything of Stuyvesant,
you'll come to the same conclusion as I did -- there is no way
Ms. Damesek did the best that could be done given the constraints she
was under.

Stan Teitel was principal of Stuyvesant for 13 years and during that
time, the DOE felt that he was doing a good job and supported
him. Every year, he awarded Ms. Damesek with a satisfactory rating and
more importantly, the school ran as it should with respect to the
APO's responsibilities. 

I find it hard to believe that Ms. Damesek would all of a sudden
change her pattern of professional behavior.

Most importantly in all of this is the fact that the DOE report was
completed in November yet Ms. Damesek was left in her position for
over a half year. That included multiple test administrations. If
there were a reason to remove her from her post without a hearing, why
wasn't it done then? What changed other than negative press?

Unless there's more going on than I'm aware, something is very wrong
here. Without due process, or tenure, Ms. Damesek would have already
been fired -- 20+years of dedicated service thrown out to satisfay the
media. As it is, there's no indication that she'll get a fair hearing.

> <p>Then they came for me,</p>
> and there was no one left to speak for me.

